**Note: Some equations don’t show up on the Google Docs app, try to use the website whenever possible.**

**YouTube and Helpful links will be next to important concepts/topics, don’t hesitate to watch some videos to clear up misconceptions or confusion.**

**Oxidation Reduction Reactions**

This file is just a guide on how to balance redox reactions.

Need more help? [Libre Texts Explanation](https://chem.libretexts.org/Bookshelves/Analytical_Chemistry/Supplemental_Modules_(Analytical_Chemistry)/Electrochemistry/Redox_Chemistry/Oxidation-Reduction_Reactions)

**Oxidation Number - The charge of an ion/element in a compound (**Ag and have oxidation numbers 2 and -1 in , respectively) It’s pretty much the ion’s charge. The oxidation numbers of individual elements should add up to the overall charge of the compound.

<table><tbody><tr><td><strong>Things to memorize</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Hydrogen </strong>(H)<strong> always has a charge of +1 or -1</strong></td><td><strong>Oxygen </strong>(O) <strong>always has a charge of -2</strong></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Dichromate </strong>is <strong>always reduced to </strong>(half rxn: )</td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Permanganate </strong>() <strong>gets reduced </strong>to or<strong> </strong>depending on if the solution is <strong>acidic or basic</strong>.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Acidic Reduction of Permanganate</strong></td><td><strong>Basic Reduction of Permanganate</strong><strong></strong></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Common Oxidizing Pathways</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Metal → Metal Ion</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Metal → Metallous Ion → Metallic Ion</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Halide Ion → Halogen → Halite Ion → Halate Ion</strong></td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>

<table><tbody><tr><td><strong>Redox reactions occur when there’s a transfer of electrons - <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dF5lB7gRtcA">Video</a></strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>OIL - RIG</strong><strong>O</strong>xidation is <strong>g</strong>ain (of electrons)<strong>R</strong>eduction is <strong>l</strong>oss (of electrons)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Another way to remember it is that <strong>oxidation leads to a higher oxidation number (charge goes up)</strong>, <strong>reduction leads to a lower oxidation number (charge goes down)</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The <strong>Reducing Agent</strong> is what <strong>gets oxidized</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>To balance Redox, we split up the equation into half reactions - <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YWl4KHsUxuw">Video</a></strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Assume</td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Identify the half reactions (using oxidation numbers)</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong></strong>oxidation number went from 0 to +1 (it got oxidized) oxidation number went from 0 to -1 (it got reduced)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Oxidation Half-Reaction</strong><strong>Add electrons</strong> to balance equationThis half reaction is now balanced<strong></strong></td><td><strong>Reduction Half-Reaction</strong><strong></strong><strong>Add electrons</strong> to balance equationThis half reaction is now balanced.</td></tr><tr><td><strong>Combine</strong> both half reactions to form the net equation<strong></strong><strong>Note: </strong>If the electrons in both half reactions don’t match up, multiply both equations to the lowest common multiple.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Those previous methods worked for when we went from element to ion and vice versa. But what if we need to balance the H’s and O’s in a redox reaction?Its different in <strong>acidic </strong>and <strong>basic solutions</strong></td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Acidic Solutions - <a href="https://youtu.be/fdbrhQAM9Gw?t=228">Video</a> (Start at 3:52)</strong>We’ll be balancing the reduction half-equation of</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Left side of the equationRight side of the equation has an ox. number of +3There was a loss of 3 electrons per Cr</td><td><strong>Find Oxidation Numbers</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance the Electrons</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance Oxygens with</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance the Hydrogens with</strong></td></tr><tr><td>This half reaction is now balanced.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td><strong>Basic Solutions - <a href="https://youtu.be/fdbrhQAM9Gw?t=452">Video</a> (start at 7:40)</strong>We’ll be balancing the reduction half-equation of</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Left side of the equationRight side of the equationThere was a loss of 3 electrons per Mn</td><td><strong>Find Oxidation Numbers</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance the Electrons</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance Oxygens with</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Balance the Hydrogens with</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Neutralize any with (add to both sides)</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Combine and to form</strong></td></tr><tr><td></td><td><strong>Cancel out excess</strong></td></tr><tr><td>This half reaction is now balanced.</td><td></td></tr></tbody></table>